Add blog for derived source for vectors (#3790)
opensearch-project/project-website: _posts/2025-05-20-Do-More-with-Less-Save-Up-to-3x-on-Storage-with-Derived-Vector-Source.markdown

Let's take a closer look at the purpose of the `_source` field.

## The `_source` field and vector search

The `_source` field in OpenSearch serves two key purposes:

1. It stores the original document content and is used to return user-facing fields in search results. For example, if you're indexing a poetry book, fields like the poem text, title, and author are typically retrieved from the `_source` field, [unless configured otherwise](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/search-plugins/searching-data/retrieve-specific-fields/).

2. It enables reindexing and recovery operations. The `_source` holds the original data needed for updates, rebuilding indexes with new settings (using the Reindex API), or recovery processes such as translog replay.

In Lucene, the `_source` is implemented as a _stored field_---a structure designed for retrieving data, not for searching it.

With vector search, you usually don't need to retrieve the vector itself: a list of floating-point numbers doesn't convey much meaning to a typical user. For example, if you're searching for a romantic poem, you don't care how the poem is semantically represented—you just want the right text, fast.

> Vector fields are very large, and including them in responses adds noise to the response and slows down search requests. In production, we typically recommend [excluding vector fields from the returned `_source`](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/vector-search/performance-tuning-search/#avoid-reading-stored-fields) to improve performance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Vector fields are very large, and including them in responses adds noise to the response and slows down search requests. In production, we typically recommend [excluding vector fields from the returned `_source`](https://docs.opensearch.org/docs/latest/vector-search/performance-tuning-search/#exclude-vectors-from-search-results) to improve performance:
```

Force merge times also improved, decreasing by about 10%, as shown in the following graph. This decrease is likely caused by the reduced amount of data that needs to be copied and rewritten when creating new segments.

![Derived Process](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-20-Do-More-with-Less-Save-Up-to-3x-on-Storage-with-Derived-Vector-Source/bench-force-merge.png){:class="img-centered"}

Perhaps most surprisingly, we saw a 90% reduction in search latency when using the Lucene engine, as shown in the following graph. One possible explanation is a cold start effect: during merges, unnecessary vector data gets loaded into the page cache and later evicted, only to be reloaded again when actually needed during search.

![Derived Process](/assets/media/blog-images/2025-05-20-Do-More-with-Less-Save-Up-to-3x-on-Storage-with-Derived-Vector-Source/bench-search-latency.png){:class="img-centered"}

These improvements all stem from reducing the amount of data stored and read from disk. By keeping shards smaller, you reduce I/O overhead during common operations like merges and searches. Thus, working with smaller shard sizes often yields surprising performance improvements.

## What's next?

> We're excited to share that we're not limiting derived source to just vector fields. Upcoming releases will expand support for derived source to all field types, unlocking even more flexibility when you work with OpenSearch.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We're excited to share that we're not limiting derived source to just vector fields. Upcoming versions will expand support for derived source to all field types, unlocking even more flexibility when you work with OpenSearch.
```
